>> Woodruff: ISLAMIST INSURGENTS
SEIZED CONTROL OF IRAQ'S SECOND
LARGEST CITY TODAY, AFTER
STAGING AN AUDACIOUS ASSAULT
THAT FORCED GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS
AND POLICE TO RUN AWAY.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY, FROM
PRIMETIME T.V. TO A CROSS-
COUNTRY BOOK TOUR, HILLARY
CLINTON'S OUT SELLING A HEFTY
NEW MEMOIR.
BUT IS SHE ALSO LAYING THE
GROUNDWORK FOR ANOTHER CAMPAIGN
FOR PRESIDENT?
>> Woodruff: AND FROM HIGH ATOP
THE SHENANDOAH MOUNTAINS, THE
STORY OF A PROJECT CONNECTING
TODAY'S YOUNG ADULTS TO
YESTERDAY'S STORIED STRUCTURES.
>> IT CONTINUES A HISTORICAL
CONVERSATION THAT STARTED IN THE
LATE '30S INTO 2014.
SO IT CONTRIBUTES TO A SENSE OF
PLACE, OF WHAT SHENANDOAH
NATIONAL PARK IS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE INTERNATIONAL
COALITION IN AFGHANISTAN
LAUNCHED AN INVESTIGATION TODAY
AFTER FIVE U.S. SPECIAL
OPERATIONS SOLDIERS WERE KILLED,
APPARENTLY BY FRIENDLY FIRE.
IT HAPPENED IN ZABUL PROVINCE IN
THE SOUTH, AND MAY BE ONE OF THE
WORST SUCH INCIDENTSAL
14 YEARS OF THE AFGHAN WAR.
FOR MORE, I SPOKE EARLIER WITH
N.P.R. REPORTER SEAN CARBERRY,
WHO'S IN KABUL.
SEAN CARBERRY, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR TALKING WITH US.
WHAT IS KNOWN EXACTLY ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED?
>> WELL, U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS
FORCES AND AFGHAN FORCES WERE
CARRYING OUT A CLEARING
OPERATION IN ZABUL PROVINCE
WHICH IS ONE OF THE MORE
UNSECURED PROVINCES IN THE
COUNTRY AND, ACCORDING TO AFGHAN
OFFICIALS, WHEN THE TROOPS WERE
ON THEIR WAY BACK TO THE BASE
FROM THIS OPERATION, IT CAME
UNDER ATTACK BY TALIBAN
MILITANTS.
AT THAT POINT, THEY CALLED IN
FOR AIR SUPPORT, AND THE AIR
STRIKE APPARENTLY HIT THE
FRIENDLY FORCES, KILLING FIVE
U.S. TROOPS AND ONE AFGHAN
FORCE.
NATO AND U.S. OFFICIALS HAVE NOT
OFFICIALLY CONFIRMED THAT IT WAS
A FRIENDLY FIRE INCIDENT.
THEY HAVE INDICATED THEY'RE
INVESTIGATING THAT.
HOWEVER, AFGHAN OFFICIALS SAID
THE AIR STRIKE HIT THE FRIENDLY
FORCES, AGAIN, KILLING FIVE U.S.
AND ONE AFGHAN TROOPS.
>> Woodruff: SO IT'S NOT
CONFIRMED BUT SOUNDS LIKE THE
EVIDENCE POINTS TO FRIENDLY
FIRE.
IS IT KNOWN WHAT TYPE AIRCRAFT?
>> REPORTS ARE THAT IT WAS A B-1
BOMBER, SO THIS IS NOT AN APACHE
HELECOPTER OR GUNSHIP OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
THIS IS MOST LIKELY HEAVY
MUNITIONS, A HEAVY BOMB THAT
WOULD HAVE BEEN DROPPED IN THIS
INSTANCE.
>> Woodruff: SEAN, WE'RE JUST
A FEW DAYS AWAY FROM THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RUNOFF
THERE IN AFGHANISTAN.
WHAWHAT IS IT SECURITY SITUATION
THERE?
YOU'RE IN KABUL.
>> IT'S INCREASING IN
CHECKPOINTS AROUND THE CITY.
OFFICIALS SAID THEY'RE ON HIGH
ALERT GOING INTO THE ELECTIONS.
IN TERMS OF THE SECURITY
INCIDENTS, THERE HAVEN'T BEEN AS
MANY AS PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
EXPECTED.
THERE HAVE BEEN FEWER ATTACKS
THAN THERE WERE IN THE RUN UP TO
THE FIRST ROUND OFFVOTING IN
APRIL.
HOWEVER, LAST WEEKEND, MILITANTS
DID CARRY OUT A SUICIDE ATTACK
AGAINST PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
ABDULLAH ABDULLAH.
HE AND HIS ENTOURAGE SURVIVED.
BUT THAT'S THE MOST HIGH-PROFILE
ATTACK WE'VE SEEN, BUT OFFICIALS
ARE EXPECTING MORE VIOLENCE FOR
ELECTION DAY THIS YEAR BECAUSE
IT'S COMING IN PEAK FIGHTING
SEASON, WHEREAS THE FIRST ROUND
WAS AT THE TAIL END OF SPRING
AND, AT THAT POINT, THE FALL
HADN'T HAPPENED, FIGHTERS
WEREN'T AS ACTIVE AT THAT POINT.
>> Woodruff: SEAN CARBERRY,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, TALKING TO
US FROM KABUL.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, USEDY.
>> Woodruff: U.S. OFFICIALS IN
WASHINGTON DECLINED COMMENT ON
THE INCIDENT, SAYING THEY ARE
WAITING FOR THE INVESTIGATION.
>> Ifill: GUNMEN IN PAKISTAN
ATTACKED A POLICE TRAINING
FACILITY TODAY NEAR THE KARACHI
AIRPORT.
IT FOLLOWED SUNDAY NIGHT'S
TALIBAN ASSAULT THAT KILLED 26
PEOPLE AT THE AIRPORT ITSELF.
TODAY'S INCIDENT FORCED A
TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF FLIGHTS
AND TRIGGERED A BRIEF SHOOTOUT
WITH SECURITY FORCES.
BUT AIRPORT OFFICIALS DOWNPLAYED
ITS SEVERITY.
>> ( translated ): THE WRONG
WORD WAS USED, THAT THERE WAS AN
"ATTACK."
THERE WAS NO SUCH SITUATION.
THERE WAS A FIRING INCIDENT,
WHICH WAS WITHIN OUR CAPABILITY
TO MANAGE.
HOWEVER, THE WORD "ATTACK" WAS
USED BY THE MEDIA, WHICH CREATED
PANIC.
YOU SAW THE RESPONSE.
POLICE, RANGERS, ARMY, EVERYONE
WAS IMMEDIATELY HERE.
>> Ifill: THE TALIBAN SAID IT
WAS ALSO BEHIND TODAY'S ATTACK
AND WARNED OF MORE VIOLENCE TO
COME.
>> Woodruff: IN SYRIA, IN-
FIGHTING BETWEEN AN AL-QAEDA-
LINKED  GROUP AND OTHER REBEL
FACTIONS HAS TAKEN A HEAVY TOLL
IN RECENT WEEKS.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS REPORTED TODAY MORE THAN
630 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED IN
THE EAST, NEAR THE IRAQI BORDER,
SINCE THE END OF APRIL.
AT LEAST 130,000 OTHERS HAVE
FLED THE REGION.
>> Ifill: THERE WAS MORE FALLOUT
IN CONGRESS TODAY OVER THE
PRISONER SWAP THAT FREED ARMY
SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL IN
AFGHANISTAN.
THE SENATE'S NUMBER TWO
DEMOCRAT, DICK DURBIN OF
ILLINOIS, SAID THERE WAS NO TIME
TO NOTIFY LAWMAKERS IN ADVANCE,
BECAUSE THE DEAL TO FREE FIVE
GUANTANAMO DETAINEES IN EXCHANGE
FOR BERGDAHL WAS FINALIZED JUST
ONE DAY BEFORE IT HAPPENED.
BUT REPUBLICAN JEFF SESSIONS
REJECTED THAT REASONING AFTER A
CLOSED BRIEFING BY DEFENSE
OFFICIALS.
>> I'M NOT SATISFIED IN ANY WAY
THAT CONGRESS SHOULD NOT HAVE
BEEN CONSULTED IN THIS MATTER.
JUST AS A MATTER OF COURTESY,
WHETHER IT WAS IN LAW OR NOT, A
MATTER OF THIS IMPORTANCE SHOULD
HAVE BEEN DISCUSSED WITH AT
LEAST KEY LEADERS IN THE
CONGRESS.
>> Ifill: DEMOCRATIC SENATOR
CARL LEVIN OF MICHIGAN CAME OUT
OF THAT SAME BRIEFING, SAYING
MILITARY LEADERS SUPPORTED THE
PRISONER SWAP.
>> WHAT THE MEDIA HAS NOT
CARRIED, I THINK, IS THE
CRITICAL QUESTION: DO OUR TOP
MILITARY UNIFORMED LEADERS
SUPPORT THIS AGREEMENT, DID
THEY, WERE THEY INVOLVED IN IT,
THEY ASSURED ME THEY WERE, AND
DID THEY SUPPORT IT, THEY
ASSURED ME THEY STRONGLY SUPPORT
IT BECAUSE OF THE ETHOS OF
GETTING OUR PEOPLE BACK.
>> Ifill: THE HOUSE BEGINS
HEARINGS ON THE BERGDAHL RELEASE
TOMORROW.
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL
WILL TESTIFY BEFORE THE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE.
>> Woodruff: THE HOUSE HAS VOTED
UNANIMOUSLY TO MAKE IT EASIER
FOR VETERANS TO GET IN TO SEE
DOCTORS.
THE BILL THAT PASSED TODAY WOULD
PAY FOR VETS TO GET CARE OUTSIDE
THE VETERANS AFFAIRS SYSTEM, IF
THEY'VE HAD LONG WAITS OR LIVE
MORE THAN 40 MILES FROM A V.A.
HOSPITAL.
A SIMILAR BILL IS PENDING IN THE
SENATE.
>> Ifill: CREW MEMBERS OF THE
SOUTH KOREA FERRY THAT SANK  IN
APRIL APPEARED IN COURT TODAY,
AT AN EMOTIONAL HEARING.
RELATIVES OF THE MORE THAN 300
WHO DIED IN THE SINKING,
WRESTLED WITH OFFICIALS AND
PACKED THE COURT ROOM.
SOME SHOUTED "MURDERER" WHEN THE
CAPTAIN ENTERED.
THE 15 CREW MEMBERS FACE CHARGES
RANGING FROM NEGLIGENCE TO
HOMICIDE FOR ABANDONING THE
SHIP.
>> Woodruff: THIS IS PRIMARY
ELECTION DAY FOR SIX MORE
STATES.
REPUBLICAN SENATOR LINDSEY
GRAHAM OF SOUTH CAROLINA AND
HOUSE MAJORITY LEADER  ERIC
CANTOR OF VIRGINIA ARE EXPECTED
TO HOLD OFF TEA PARTY
CHALLENGERS.
PRIMARIES ARE ALSO SCHEDULED IN
MAINE, NEVADA, AND NORTH DAKOTA;
AND ARKANSAS IS HOLDING A SERIES
OF RUNOFFS.
>> Ifill: WALL STREET HAD A
RELATIVELY QUIET DAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED NOT QUITE THREE POINTS TO
CLOSE NEAR 16,946.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN ONE
POINT TO CLOSE AT 4,338.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 SLIPPED HALF
A POINT TO END AT 1,950.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR."
SUNNI MILITANTS FORCE IRAQ'S
ARMY OUT OF A KEY CITY;
COULD HILLARY CLINTON'S NEW BOOK
FORESHADOW A SECOND PRESIDENTIAL
BID?
THE FIGHT IN THE STATES OVER
MEDICAID EXPANSION;
A JUDGE STRIKES DOWN TENURE
PROTECTIONS FOR CALIFORNIA'S
PUBLIC SCHOOLTEACHERS;
AND CONNECTING THE NEXT
GENERATION TO CHERISHED HISTORIC
PLACES.
>> Woodruff: IN A MAJOR BLOW TO
THE GOVERNMENT OF IRAQI PRIME
MINISTER NOURI AL-MALIKI, AND TO
THAT COUNTRY'S STABILITY, SUNNI
MILITANTS HAVE TAKEN OVER IRAQ'S
SECOND LARGEST CITY.
>> Woodruff: FIGHTERS FROM THE
"ISLAMIC STATE OF IRAQ AND THE
LEVANT" PUSHED IRAQI ARMY UNITS
FROM PARTS OF MOSUL OVERNIGHT
AFTER DAYS OF FIGHTING.
THE LARGELY SUNNI-MUSLIM CITY IN
THE NORTH IS A STRATEGIC HUB FOR
IRAQ'S OIL INDUSTRY, AS WELL AS
A GATEWAY TO SYRIA.
THE MILITANTS, ALSO KNOWN AS
"ISIS" OR "I-S-I-L," CAPTURED
MILITARY DEPOTS, EQUIPMENT AND
WEAPONS IN MOSUL.
THEY ALSO SEIZED PROVINCIAL
GOVERNMENT HEADQUARTERS AND
FREED MORE THAN A THOUSAND
PRISONERS.
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS FLED
NORTH TOWARD THE KURDISH
AUTONOMOUS REGION, JAMMING
ROADS.
SOME WERE IRAQI SOLDIERS, WHO
LEFT THEIR UNIFORMS IN THE
STREETS.
IN BAGHDAD, NEWLY-RE-ELECTED
PRIME MINISTER NOURI AL-MALIKI
ADDRESSED THET-
CHALLENGE YET IN HIS EIGHT YEAR
TENURE.
>> ( translated ): I CALL UPON
THE PARLIAMENT TO LIVE UP TO ITS
RESPONSIBILITY TO DECLARE A
STATE OF EMERGENCY AND GENERAL
MOBILIZATION.
WE HAVE TO DECLARE A
COMPREHENSIVE MOBILIZATION AND
THE UTMOST ALERT IN POLITICAL,
FINANCIAL AND POPULAR
CAPABILITIES TO DEFEAT TERRORISM
AND BRING LIFE TO NORMAL IN ALL
AREAS OCCUPIED BY TERRORISTS,
EITHER IN MOSUL OR ANY OTHER
CITY.
>> Woodruff: BUT MALIKI'S
SHIITE-LED GOVERNMENT HAS
LARGELY FAILED IN RECONCILING
WITH IRAQ'S SUNNI POPULATION.
THE "ISLAMIC STATE" HAS TAKEN
ADVANTAGE OF THE BREACH.
THE SUNNI EXTREMIST GROUP
PREVIOUSLY TOOK OVER FALLUJAH
AND PARTS OF RAMADI IN WESTERN
AND CENTRAL IRAQ.
IT'S ALSO A PRINCIPAL COMBATANT
IN SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR, BUT HAS
FOUGHT AGAINST  OTHER  REBEL
GROUPS AS FIERCELY AS MANY OF
ITS UNITS HAVE FOUGHT AGAINST
THE ARMY OF PRESIDENT ASSAD.
THE GROUP'S AMBITIONS THERE HAVE
LED TO A RUPTURE WITH  AL
QAIDA'S CORE ORGANIZATION, WHICH
SIDES WITH THE SYRIAN REBELLION.
THE ATTACK ON MOSUL NOW
THREATENS TO DRAW NEARBY KURDISH
FORCES INTO THE FIGHTING AS
WELL.
THAT DREW THIS REACTION FROM THE
U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT TODAY.
>> THE THREAT I.S.I.L. IS
PRESENTING IS NOT JUST THREAT TO
IRAQ, BUT IS A THREAT TO REGION.
THIS GROWING CE
THE IMPORTANCE OF IRAQIS FROM
ALL COMMUNITIES WORKING TO
CONFRONT THIS COMMON ENEMY.
>> Woodruff: IRAQ'S PARLIAMENT
HAS ANNOUNCED IT WILL MEET
THURSDAY TO DECIDE ON A STATE OF
EMERGENCY.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON WHAT
THE TAKEOVER MEANS FOR IRAQ, THE
REGION AND BEYOND.
I'M JOINED BY LAITH KUBBA,
SENIOR DIRECTOR FOR THE MIDDLE
EAST AND NORTH AFRICA AT THE
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY
AND KIMBERLY KAGAN, PRESIDENT OF
THE INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF
WAR.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH.
SO, KIMBERLY KAGAN, LET ME START
WITH YOU.
WE KNOW THESE INSURGENTS HAVE
BEEN CREATING HAVOC FOR SOME
TIME, LAUNCHING ATTACKS.
HOW IMPORTANT IS THIS PARTICULAR
ATTACK TAKING OVER THE CITY OF
MOSUL?
>> THIS ATTACK, THE ISLAMIC
STATE OF IRAQ AND THE LEVANT AND
THE LEVANT HAS LAUNCHED ON
MUSLIMS IS INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT
BECAUSE IT IS THE BEGIN OF A
CAMPAIGN AND A PUSH BEYOND MOSUL
INTO THE AREAS TOWARD BAGHDAD
THAT THE ISLAMIC STATE OF IRAQ
WANTS TO GOVERN.
IT SEEKS TO ESTABLISH AN EMIRATE
AND STATE TO GOVERN INSIDE IRAQ
AS WELL AS INSIDE SYRIA WHERE IT
HAS ANNOUNCED THE BEGINNING OF
ITS EMIRATE.
I THINK MOSUL WILL BE ITS NEW
CAPITAL.
>> Woodruff: LAITH KUBBA, HOW
DO YOU SEE IT?
AND WHY IS THIS HAPPENING NOW?
HOW IS IT THAT THIS INSURGENT
GROUP HAS GOT TON THIS LEVEL
WHERE THEY CAN WREAK THIS KIND
OF CHAOS IN THE COUNTRY?
>> OVER THE LAST TWO YEARS, I
THINK THEY HAVE BEEN GROWING
STEADILY.
ALL THE SIGNS WERE THERE, NOBODY
WANTED TO READ THEM.
THEY MOVED FROM BEING AN
OFFSHOOT TERRORIST GROUP, AND
THEIR PEOPLE MIGHT THINK WE CAN
LIVE WITH TERRORIST GROUPS AND
THE SKIRMISHES THEY CREATE BUT
THIS HAS BECOME AN ARMY OF
10,000 TO 15,000, VERY WELL
EQUIPPED WITH ROCKET LAUNCHERS,
SOME AIR MISSILES, AND THEY ARE
SO COORDINATED, I THINK THEY'VE
BECOME A MAGNET FOR MORE
SOLDIERS TO JOIN THEM.
THIS LATEST ATTACK NOT ONLY ONE
ATTACK, IT'S A COORDINATED
ATTACKS ON FIVE CITIES IN IRAQ,
HAS GIVEN THEM IMMENSE MOMENTUM
AND CREDIBILITY, AND THEY'RE
GOING TO BECOME A SERIOUS THREAT
TO THE REGION.
I'M NOT REALLY SURE IF THEY CAN
HOLD TERRITORY FOR LONG, BUT
CERTAINLY THEY'VE ACHIEVED THEIR
OBJECTIVE IN SAYING WE'RE A
FORCE AND I THINK HUNDREDS WILL
JOIN THEM, AND THIS IS GOING TO
BECOME A REGIONAL PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: KIMBERLY KAGAN,
HOW DID THEY GET TO HAVE THIS
CAPABILITY?
BECAUSE IT WAS OPPORTUNITY CASE
WHEN THE U.S. PULLED OUT OF
IRAQ.
>> THE ISLAMIC STATE OF IRAQ IS
NO LONGER A TERRORIST GROUP.
IT IS AN ARMY.
IT IS AN INSURGENCY, AND IT HAS
GROWN IN ITS CAPABILITIES INSIDE
OF IRAQ BY REALLY FIELDING AN
ARMY, BY FREEING PRISONERS THAT
WERE HELD IN IRAQI PRISONS, BY
TESTING THE IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES, BY TAKING CONTROL
PIECEMEAL.
AND IF WE TRIED TO CONFRONT IT
AS A TERRORIST ORGANIZATION, WE
WILL MISUNDERSTAND ITS N
IT IS AN INSURGENCY, IT IS
FIGHTING FOR TERRAIN, AND IT HAS
REALLY COME OF IMPORTANCE AS
PRIME MINISTER AL-MALIKI TRIED
TO EXCLUDE SUNNIES FROM HIS
GOVERNMENT AND CREATE RESENTMENT
AMONG THE SUNNI POPULATION IN
IRAQ.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS THE ROLE
OF THE MA LICKSY GOVERNMENT IN
THAT THIS IS HAPPENING UNDER
THEIR NOSES?
>> THE I EMERGENCE OF I.S.I.L.
IS VERY MUCH A PRODUCT OF WHAT
IS GOING ON IN SYRIA, BUT I
THINK THE FAILURE OF POLITICS IN
BAGHDAD AND THE FAILURE
CERTAINLY OF THE IRAQI ARMY IS A
DIRECT RESULT OF WHAT'S GOING ON
IN BAGHDAD.
BEAR IN MIND THE PRIME MINISTER
IS THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF, HE'S
BEEN PRIME MINISTER EIGHT YEARS,
IRAQ IS AN OLD COUNTRY AND IT
COULD NOT STAND ITS GROUND IN
FRONT OF HUNDREDS OF ATTACKERS.
A COUNTRY THAT KEPT IRAN IN
CHECK FOR EIGHT YEARS IS NOW NOT
CAPABLE OF KEEPING AN INSURGENCY
IN CHECK.
I THINK FOR IS, IS
EVIDENCE THAT SOMETHING IS
FUNDAMENTALLY WRONG IN THE WAY
THEIR COUNTRY IS GOVERNED.
EVEN THE ELECTORAL PROCESS THAT
IS REPEATED OVER AND OVER AGAIN
IS NOT PRODUCING A GOOD
GOVERNMENT.
>> Woodruff: KIMBERLY KAGAN,
WHAT'S TO STOP THEM, I.S.I.L.
FROM JUST DOING WHAT THEY WANT
AND TAKING OVER ANY TERRITORY
THEY WANT?
>> I THINK THAT THE ORGANIZATION
HAS MOMENTUM, THE ORGANIZATION
HAS AIMED FOR YEARS TO DISSOLVE
THE IRAQI SECURITY FORCES AND
NAMED A CAMPAIGN, THE SOLDIERS
HARDEST CAMPAIGN THAT IT'S BEEN
CONDUCTED FOR A YEAR FOR THAT
GOAL.
I THINK THE IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES ARE BREAKING AND WILL
CONTINUE TO EVEN THOUGH PRIME
MINISTER AL-MALIKI HAS DECLARED
A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
AND ARE THEY EVEN ABLE TO DEFEND
BAGHDAD AND ITS ENVIRONS AND
WILL THEY BE ABLE TO MOBILIZE,
AS THEY ALREADY HAVE, SHEER
MILITANTS GROUPED, BACKED BY
IRAN AND STRAINED BY HEZBOLLAH
THAT FOUGHT IN SYRIA IN ORDER TO
DEFEND THE SHIA AREAS OF BAGHDAD
AND SOUTH.
>> Woodruff: ARE WE LOOKING
FOR A SHOWDOWN AROUND BAGHDAD?
>> JUST TO EMPHASIZE THE POINT,
IRAQIS EXPECT A STATE WITH AN
ARMY, NOT MILITIAS THAT ARE
SPONSORED OR SENT TO SYRIA TO
FIGHT OR CALLED UPON TO DEFEND
ITS CITY.
IRAQ SHOULD HAVE AN ARMY AND I
THINK IT'S A SIGN OF HOW FAR
THINGS HAVE GONE TO SEE
MILITIAS, ROAMING TRYING TO
DEFEND CITIES.
>> Woodruff: TO LAITH KUBBA
FIRST, WHY DOES THIS MADD MATTER
IN THE BROADER REGION?
YOU HAVE THE CIVIL WAR GOING ON
NEXT DOOR IN SYRIA, THE EFFECT
ON COUNTRIES IN THE AREA?
>> THE FACT THAT THIS ARMY
CONTROLS TERRITORY SO WELL
EQUIPPED AND SO CAPABLE AND WITH
MOMEMTUM, I WORRY ABOUT
JORDAN BECAUSE THAT'S A VERY
SOFT FRONT, THEY CAN PUSH THERE
ANYTIME, AND THIS GROUP NOW IS
INCREASING IN NUMBERS AND
SOPHISTICATION.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE THERE FOR A
LONG TIME.
>> Woodruff: AND THE SAME
QUESTION I ASKED A MINUTE AGO,
WHAT'S TO STOP THEM FROM
MARCHING AND GOING WHERE THEY
WANT?
>> I CERTAINLY HOPE THAT THE
IRAQI SECURITY FORCES CAN STOP
THEM, BUT REALISTICALLY, WHAT WE
SEE NOW IS A SAFE HAVEN THAT HAS
DEVELOPED IN IRAQ AND SYRIA FROM
WHICH ISLAM MILITANTS CAN BOTH
LAUNCH ATTACKS AND TRAIN FOREIGN
FIGHTERS AND SEND THEM OUT AND
ALSO GOVERN TERRAIN AND
OPPRESSED PEOPLE.
THAT IS PRECISELY THE KIND OF
SAFE HAVEN THIS ADMINISTRATION
AND ITS PREDECESSOR HAVE STATED
THAT THE UNITED STATES WILL NOT
TOLERATE IN THE REGION.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT RAISES
QUESTIONS THAT WE WILL BE
CONTINUING TO LOOKxD AT AND WANT
TO ASK ABOUT THE IN DAYS TO
COME.
KIMBERLY KAGAN AND LAITH KUBBA,
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: FORMER SECRETARY OF
STATE HILLARY CLINTON HEADED
BACK OUT ON THE TRAIL TODAY, NOT
FOR A POLITICAL CAMPAIGN, BUT TO
SUPPORT HER NEW MEMOIR.
WITH A HOPSCOTCH SCHEDULE OF
MEDIA APPEARANCES, POLITICAL
OBSERVERS ARE SCANNING THE BOOK,
AND HER INTERVIEWS, FOR 2016 TEA
LEAVES.
>> Ifill: THE BOOK TOUR FORMALLY
BEGAN THIS MORNING, WITH THE
AUTHOR ARRIVING AT A BARNES AND
NOBLE IN NEW YORK, TO APPLAUSE
AND AN ARMY OF CAMERAS.
BUT THE BUILDUP STARTED WEEKS
AGO.
>> IT'S ABOUT THE HARD CHOICES
EVERYBODY HAS TO MAKE IN LIFE.
>> Ifill: AFTER DAYS OF LEAKS
AND SECRETLY PURCHASED ADVANCE
COPIES, HER SECOND MEMOIR, "HARD
CHOICES," IS NOW OFFICIALLY ON
THE BOOKSHELVES.
IN NEW YORK TODAY, BOOK BUYERS
LINED UP TO MEET THE FORMER
FIRST LADY, SENATOR AND
SECRETARY OF STATE.
THE CAREFULLY-ORCHESTRATED ROLL-
OUT ONLY STOKES SPECULATION THAT
SHE IS LAUNCHING A 2016
PRESIDENTIAL PRACTICE RUN.
SHE'S ON THE COVER OF "PEOPLE"
MAGAZINE.
SHE'S MADE HIGH-PROFILE
APPEARANCES AT A NUMBER OF
RECENT FORUMS.
AND SHE'S SITTING DOWN FOR A
SLEW OF TELEVISION INTERVIEWS,
STARTING LAST NIGHT WITH A.B.C.
NEWS' DIANE SAWYER.
>> WHEN ARE YOU GOING TO DECIDE
WHETHER YOU'RE RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT?
>> YOU KNOW, I'M GOING TO DECIDE
WHEN IT FEELS RIGHT FOR ME TO
DECIDE BECAUSE--
>> STILL BY THE END OF THIS
YEAR?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, CERTAINLY NOT
BEFORE THEN.
I JUST WANT TO KIND OF GET
THROUGH THIS YEAR, TRAVEL AROUND
THE COUNTRY, SIGN BOOKS, HELP IN
THE MIDTERM ELECTIONS IN THE
FALL AND THEN TAKE A DEEP BREATH
AND KIND OF GO THROUGH MY PLUSES
AND MINUSES ABOUT WHAT I WILL
AND WILL NOT BE THINKING ABOUT
AS I MAKE THE DECISION.
>> Ifill: IN THAT SAME
INTERVIEW, CLINTON SAID SHE MADE
MILLIONS IN PAID SPEECHES
BECAUSE SHE AND FORMER PRESIDENT
BILL CLINTON WERE "DEAD BROKE"
WHEN THEY LEFT THE WHITE HOUSE
IN 2001.
AFTER REPUBLICANS SAID THIS
PROVED CLINTON IS NOW OUT OF
TOUCH WITH AVERAGE AMERICANS,
SHE RETURNED TO A.B.C. THIS
MORNING TO DEFEND HERSELF.
>> I FULLY APPRECIATE HOW HARD
LIFE IS FOR SO MANY AMERICANS
TODAY.
IT'S AN ISSUE I'VE WORKED ON AND
CARED ABOUT MY ENTIRE ADULT
LIFE.
BILL AND I WERE OBVIOUSLY
BLESSED.
WE WORKED HARD FOR EVERYTHING WE
GOT IN OUR LIVES AND WE HAVE
CONTINUED TO WORK HARD AND WE'VE
BEEN BLESSED IN THE LAST 14
YEARS.
BUT I WANT TO USE THE TALENTS
AND RESOURCES I HAVE TO MAKE
SURE OTHERS GET THE SAME
CHANCES.
>> Ifill: EARLY REVIEWS HAVE
BEEN DECIDEDLY MIXED.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" CALLED IT A
"SUBTLE, FINELY CALIBRATED
WORK."
"THE WASHINGTON POST" DESCRIBED
IT AS "A CAREFUL BOOK"
AND "SLATE" SAID CLINTON "GOES
ON AT GREAT LENGTH, BUT NOT
GREAT DEPTH."
PART TRAVELOGUE AND PARTY POLICY
TREATISE, "HARD CHOICES" CLOCKS
IN AT 600 PAGES, FOCUSING
LARGELY ON HER TIME AS SECRETARY
OF STATE
IT INCLUDES PHOTOS FROM
CLINTON'S TIME CAMPAIGNING FOR
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND WORKING WITH
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN, WHO IS
ALSO CONSIDERING A 2016 RUN,
AS WELL AS HER MEETINGS WITH
WORLD LEADERS FROM AFRICA TO
ASIA.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON THE
ROLLOUT OF CLINTON'S MEMOIR AND
WHAT IT MIGHT TELL US ABOUT HER
FUTURE IN POLITICS, WE ARE
JOINED BY ANN LEWIS, A LONGTIME
ADVISOR TO BOTH HILLARY AND
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON.
CHRIS LEHANE, A DEMOCRATIC
STRATEGIST WHO WORKED IN THE
CLINTON ADMINISTRATION.
AND AMY CHOZICK, NATIONAL
POLITICAL REPORTER FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES WHO IS COVERING
MRS. CLINTON.
AMY CHOZICK, WORDS THAT COME TO
MIND ARE ORCHESTRATED,
CALIBRATED, STRUCTURED, THIS
ROLL OUT.
HOW ORGANIZED IS IT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT WAS INCREDIBLY WELL
THOUGHT OUT RIGHT UP UNTIL THE
MOTHER'S DAY EXCERPT ABOUT
HILLARY CLINTON'S MOTHER DOROTHY
RODHAM THAT WAS KIND OF OUR
INTRODUCTION OF THE BOOK AND
ALSO SHOWED A VERY SOFTER SIDE
OF HER, I WOULD SAY, AND IT
CONTINUED FROM THEN, THE
PEOPLE'S MAGAZINE COVER RIGHT UP
TO TODAY AT THE BARNES & NOBLE
IN NEW YORK.
>> WHAT WAS THATLIKE?
CRAZY?
>> IT WAS INSANE.
THERE WERE A THOUSAND PEOPLE
OUTSIDE.
A LOT OF PEOPLE SLEPT OUTFRONT
READY FOR HILLARY.
THERE WAS A GIANT CAMPAIGN BUS.
I TALKED TO A WOMAN WHO PULLED
HER 11-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER OUT OF
SCHOOL TO ATTEND.
SO HAD THE FEEL AND ENTHUSIASM
OF CAMPAIGN.
THIS WAS THE MIDDLE OF DOWNTOWN
MANHATTAN SO NOT EXACTLY A PROXY
FOR A NICE WADE PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN.
>> YOU HAVE BEEN READY FOR WHAT,
EXACTLY?
>> WHATEVER IT IS HILLARY
DECIDED TO DO.
THEY HAVE 2 MILLION MEMBERS OR
MORE GROWING EVERY DAY.
HERE'S THIS WONDERFUL PUBLIC
SERVANT AND ANYBODY WHO READS
THE BOOK WILL SEE HOW MUCH
HILLARY CLINTON CARES AND
POLICY, ABOUT DOING THE RIGHT
THING, HOW PROUD SHE IS OF OUR
COUNTRY.
WE WANT TO GO AS FAR AS SHE
WOULD LIKE TO DO AND IF SHE
WANTS TO GO FURTHER, WE'LL BE
THERE.
>> Ifill: IS IT JUST ME OR
DOES THIS SEEM TO BE MORE
CAREFULLY ROLLED OUT,
STRUCTURED, NOT IN COLLABORATION
WITH HILLARY, BUT CERTAINLY MUCH
MORE -- DONE WITH MORE OF AN EYE
OF THE POLITICAL FUTURE THAN THE
LAST BOOK ROLLOUT IN 2008?
>> THE LAST BOOK WAS IN A VERY
IMRCHT CLIMATE, AND IF YOU GO
BACK -- AND A DIFFERENT MEDIA
LANDSCAPE.
LOOK AT THE WAYS WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THE BOOK THAT DIDN'T EXIST
LAST TIME.
THERE WAS NO TWITTER AT THE TIME
THAT SAYS HILLARY'S BOOK.
SO YOU HAVE A HIGH-TECH,
SOPHISTICATED CONVERSATION GOING
NUT THE BLOGOSPHERE, AND THEN
LOW TECH LIKE THE BUS.
>> Ifill: CHRIS LEHANE, YOU
HAVE A CANDIDATERE WITH 100%
NAME RECOGNITION.
HOW DO YOU HANDLE IF THIS IS
INDEED A POLITICAL ROLLOUT AS
WELL AS LITERARY, HOW DO YOU
HANDLE THAT DIFFERENTLY THAN ANY
OTHER CANDIDATE?
>> GREAT QUESTION.
I'M NOT SURE IF THE BOOK WILL OR
WILL NOT BE THE EQUIVALENT OF
WAR AND PEACE, BUT IT'S
CERTAINLY BEEN HANDLED ABOUT AS
WELL AS YOU COULD AT A WAR AND
PEACE LEVEL.
BY THAT I MEAN I THINK IT'S
REALLY SMART.
I THINK INFORMED BY HILLARY
CLINTON'S EXPERIENCE IN THE 2008
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN, IF THIS
IS REALLY AN EFFORT TO CONTROL
AMERICA, DEFINE HERSELF ON HER
OWN TERMS -- I MEAN, EVEN THE
TIMING, PRESIDENTIAL ASPECT
BOOKS, WHICH THIS MAY OR MAY NOT
BE, TYPICALLY HAPPENS YEARS OUT.
THIS IS HAPPENING SEVERAL YEARS
OUT.
WE LIVE IN A PE PERPETUAL CAMPAN
WORLD, AND IMPORTANT TO CONTROL
YOUR CHARACTER DEFINITION EVEN
DOWN TO THE TITLE AND THE
CONTENT OF THIS BOOK, SHE'S
DOING THAT, AND I THINK IT'S A
SMART STRATEGY AND THE EXECUTION
HAS BEEN EXTREMELY EFFECTIVE.
>> Ifill: AMY CHOZICK, THE
EXECUTION INCLUDES GETTING IN
FRONT OF INTERVIEWERS AND
ANSWERING QUESTIONS THAT MAY
TAKE OW OFF TOPIC, LIKE SHE'S
BEEN ASKED ABOUT MONICA LEWINSKY
AND BENGHAZI AND MADE THE
COMMENT TO DIANE SAWYER THAT SHE
AND BILL CLINTON NEEDED TO EARN
THE MONEY TO PAY FOR HOUSES AND
MORTGAGES WHICH THE REPUBLICANS
JUMPED ON, SO THERE ARE ALSO THE
POTENTIAL FOR SLIPUPS HERE.
>> I ACTUALLY WELCOMED THE
SLIPUPS WHICH SIGNALED IF SHE'S
A CANDIDATE IN 2016, MAYBE SHE
WON'T BE SO SCRIPTED AND FIND
OUT HOW AMERICANS FEEL ABOUT IT
BEFORE SHE UTTERS EVERY LINE.
I FOUND THE GAP REFRESHING AS A
POLITICAL REPORTER.
>> Ifill: ANN LEWIS, YOU HAVE
BEEN THROUGH A LOT OF THIS WITH
THE CLINTONS.
I WONDER IF THIS ISN'T TRYING TO
DEFINE YOURSELF BEFORE EVERYONE
RACES IN AND DOES IT DID ON THE
KIND OF ISSUES THAT HAVE NOW
BEEN DESCRIBED AS HER GAP.
>> GOOD POINT.
I THINK THE FIRST PART IS
HILLARY CLINTON TALKING ABOUT
THE LAST FOUR YEARS, AS
SECRETARY OF STATE, SHE WAS
AMERICA'S AMBASSADOR TO THE WAR.
SHE WANTS PEOPLE TO KNOW WHAT'S
SO IMPORTANT.
WE NEED TO BE LEADERS, WHAT'S AT
STAKE, SHE WANTS TO DO IT IN HER
OWN VOICE, SHE CARES ABOUT THIS
DEEPLY.
PEOPLE WHO READ THE BOOK WILL
GET THE SENSE OF BOTH THE
POLICY, THE SUBSTANCE BUT ALSO
THE PERSONALITY SHE BRINGS TO
IT.
SHE CAN DO THAT BETTER FOR
HERSELF THAN ANYBODY ELSE CAN
TALKING ABOUT HER.
>> Ifill: YOU TALKED ABOUT THE
TITLE "HARD CHOICES."
ONE OF THE THINGS SHE SAID TODAY
AND YESTERDAY, THERE HAVE BEEN
SO MANY INTERVIEWS IT'S HARD TO
KEEP TRACK, BUT SHE SAID HARD
CHOICES ARE WHAT PRESIDENTS DO.
THAT'S THE CLOSEST SHE'S COME IN
SAYING HARD CHOICES IS ABOUT
CONSIDERING THE PRESIDENCY?
>> YEAH, YOU'RE NOT SUPPOSED TO
JUDGE A BOOK BY ITS TITLE, BUT I
THINK IN THESE TYPES OF BOOKS
THERE'S AN AWFUL LOT TO THE
TITLE BECAUSE ULTIMATELY YOU'RE
TRYING TO GIVE FOLKS A SENSE OF
WHO YOU ARE AS A PERSON,
PARTICULARLY IF YOU END UP BEING
A PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE, AND
SHE OBVIOUSLY HAS BEEN ONE
BEFORE AND HAD A LOT OF
EXPERIENCE.
THAT'S WHERE IT BREAKS INTO TWO
CATEGORIES.
ONE IS YOUR CHARACTER,
PERSONALITY, AND YOUR OTHER IS
YOUR VISION FOR THE COUNTRY, AND
I THINK THE TITLE "HARD CHOICES"
DOES A GOOD JOB OF ENCAPSULATING
BOTH AND WOULD FIT NICELY ON A
BUMPER STICKER AND, I THINK, I
THINK IS A SMART WAY TO PACKAGE
ALL OF THIS AND AT THE END OF
THE DAY SHE IS TALKING ABOUT THE
FACT THAT WHEN YOU ARE A
PRESIDENT OR SECRETARY OF STATE
OR IN THE U.S. SENATE, THAT YOU
DO HAVE TO MAKE HARD CHOICES,
THAT IS PART OF BEING A LEADER
AND I THINK THIS GOES TO BOTH
ELEMENTS, THE CHARACTER OF
PERSONALITY, WHO SHE IS AND ALSO
THAT VISION FOR THE COUNTRY AND,
YOU KNOW, BASED ON WHAT I'VE
SEEN FROM THE BOOK, IF SHE IS
TALKING RETROSPECTIVELY ABOUT
OUR FOUR YEARS BUT EXTRAPOLATING
FROM THAT IN TERMS OF WHAT SHE
CARES ABOUT AND HOW POTENTIALLY
SHE LOOKS AT ISSUES
POSTSPECTIVELY SO SHE DOES A
GOOD JOB AT BOTH.
>> Ifill: YOU'VE BOTH TALKED
TO ENOUGH PEOPLE INSIDE
HILLARY-LAND.
IS THERE ANYBODY WHO DOESN'T
THINK SHE'S RUNNING?
FIRST CHRIS LEHANE.
>> WELL, I THINK THAT, YES,
EVERY SIGNAL AND SIGN OUT THERE
WOULD CERTAINLY SUGGEST SHE'S
DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO
MAKE SURE SHE'S IN A POSITION TO
RUN.
OBVIOUSLY, I DEFER TO HER.
IT'S HER CHOICE AND I THINK WE
ALL RECOGNIZE AND RESPECT THAT.
BUT THIS BOOK -- I MEAN, THIS
BOOK, TO ME, YOU CAN EVALUATE
THE PROCESS AND APPROACHES SHE'S
TAKING AND IT'S INDICATIVE OF
SOMEBODY WHO'S DOING EVERYTHING
POSSIBLE TO PUT THEMSELVES IN
THE STRONGEST POSITION TO SAY,
YES, INDEED, I AM A COUNTY FOR
PRESIDENT IN 2016.
>> Ifill: ANN LEWIS YOU TALK
TO SO MANY PEOPLE AND DEVOTE
TIME TO TRACKING HER FOOTPRINTS,
ANYBODY SAY, NO, SHE'S NOT GOING
TO DO IT?
>> 99% SURE ONE PERSON SAID SHE
WAS RUNNING.
ANOTHER PERSON SAID THE DULLER
THE BOOK, THE MORE CHANCE SHE'S
RUNNING.
SO READ INTO THAT WHAT YOU WILL.
I THINK THE BOOK WAS CAUTIOUS
THAT SHE COULD LEAVE HER OPTIONS
OPEN.
FRIENDS OF HERS, CHERYL MILLS,
BEING A KEY ONE SAYING THEY
DON'T WANT HER TO RUN, THAT THEY
WORRY ABOUT THE SCRUTINY OF THE
CAMPAIGN ATHT WANT HER
TO ENJOY HER LIFE.
>> WHAT ABOUT OTHER DEMOCRATS
WHO MIGHT BE CONSIDERING IT?
>> CLINTON ADDRESSED THIS IN ONE
OF THE INTERVIEWS AND SHE SAID
SHE WASN'T WORRIED IT WAS
FREEZING OUT THE FIELD BUT I
THINK THE PARTY IS ANXIOUS FOR
HER TO MAKE UP HER MIND SO THEY
CAN GET BEHIND SOMEONE ELSE IF
FOR SOME REASON IT'S NOT HER.
>> WHAT'S THE HARDEST CHOICE
HILLARY CLINTON HAS TO MAKE
BETWEEN NOW AND THE END OF THE
YEAR.
>> SHE HAS REFERRED TO THIS, SHE
WOULD PROBABLY HAVE TO DECIDE
WHETHER, IN FACT, SHE'S GOING
FORWARD.
CAN I STOP AND DISAGREE?
I ALMOST NEVER DISAGREE WITH AMY
AND SHE'S BEEN A GREAT OBSERVER.
BUT I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
READ THIS BOOK WILL NOT THINK
IT'S DULL.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S DULL --
>> Ifill: ALL RIGHT.
JUST WANTED TO GET THAT ON
THE RECORD.
>> Ifill: SHE OPENED THE
POSSIBILITY IT MAY NOT BE
EXCITING.
>> OH, I THINK IT WILL BE
THRILLING.
BUT HILLARY CLINTON SAID THIS,
SHE IS RIGHT NOW IN FOR HER VERY
UNUSUAL PLACE.
THAT IS, SHE CAN TAKE HER TIME
WHEN SHE GETS UP IN THE MORNING,
SHE CAN GO OUT AND WALK, SHE CAN
SPEND THAT TIME WITH HER
HUSBAND.
SHE REALLY, AT THE SAME TIME,
HAS THIS OPPORTUNITY TO STEP
FORWARD, TO BE A LEADER AGAIN
FOR THE UNITED STATES.
SHE HAS TO DECIDE WHAT.
AGAIN, THAT IS A VERY TOUGH
CHOICE.
>> Ifill: A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
WEIGHING PROS AND CONS TO SEE
WHAT SHE DOES WITH THE CHOICE.
ANN LEWIS, AMY CHOZICK, CHRIS
LEHANE, THANK YOU ALL VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
S FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: THE BATTLES OVER
WHETHER TO EXPAND MEDICAID
COVERAGE UNDER THE FEDERAL
HEALTH CARE LAW ARE STILL
PLG
STATES THIS SUMMER.
THE LATEST: VIRGINIA, WHERE
REPUBLICANS IN THE STATE SENATE
GRABBED CONTROL OF THAT CHAMBER
YESTERDAY, AND PREVENTED
GOVERNOR TERRY MCAULIFFE, A
DEMOCRAT, FROM OPTING INTO THE
EXPANSION.
IT HAPPENED AFTER ANOTHER
DEMOCRAT, A STATE SENATOR,
UNEXPECTEDLY RESIGNED AMID
CLAIMS THAT HE WAS TRADING HIS
SEAT FOR ANOTHER POSITION AND AN
APPOINTMENT FOR HIS DAUGHTER.
MEANWHILE, THERE ARE A HANDFUL
OF STATES, INCLUDING INDIANA,
PENNSYLVANIA AND UTAH, WHERE
REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS ARE
CONSIDERING PARTICIPATING IN
MEDICAID EXPANSION, BUT ONLY
WITH MORE REQUIREMENTS AND
RESTRICTIONS FROM THOSE WHO
WOULD BE COVERED.
SO FAR, 26 STATES, PLUS THEF COE
AGREED TO EXPAND.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION SAYS
SIX MILLION PEOPLE HAVE GAINED
MEDICAID COVERAGE.
BUT THERE MAY BE NEARLY TWO
MILLION WAITING FOR THEIR
APPLICATIONS TO BE PROCESSED.
JULIE ROVNER, WHO IS NOW WITH
KAISER HEALTH NEWS, IS WITH US.
WELCOME BACK TO THE PROGRAM.
>> NICE TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: WHY HAVE SOME
STATES STILL NOT MADE A DECISION
ABOUT WHETHER TO EXPAND
MEDICAID?
>> OF COURSE, THEY DON'T HAVE
TO.
IN 2012 THE SUPREME COURT SAID
THIS IS OPTIONAL.
THIS, OF COURSE, IS NOT GOING TO
BE OPTIONAL AS THE HEALTH LAW
WAS PASSED, ANTICIPATED EVERY
STATE WOULD EXPAND MEDICAID.
CONGRESS KNEW WHEN IT PASSED IN
2010 STATES DIDN'T HAVE EXTRA
MONEY TO HELP PAY FOR MEDICAID
WHICH IS A SHARED PROGRAM
BETWEEN FEDERAL AND STATE
GOVERNMENTS, BASICALLY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PAYS A LITTLE
MORE THAN HALF THE COST, BUT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SAID FOR THIS
EXPANSION POPULATION THEY WOULD
PAY 100% OF THEST FOR THE
FIRST THREE YEARS AND PHASE DOWN
TO 90%, SO STILL MOST OF THE
COST GOING INTO PERPETUITY BUT
WHEN THE SUPREME COURT MADE IT
OPTIONAL HALF THE STATES AS WE
POINTED OUT JUMPED IN AND THE
OTHER HALF MOSTLY REPUBLICAN
STATES SAID WE DON'T EVEN KNOW
IF WE CAN AFFORD THAT 10% THAT
WE WOULD HAVE TO KICK IN AFTER
THE THREE YEARS WHEN IT'S GOING
TO BE, YOU KNOW, FEDERALLY
FUNDED.
SO THEY'RE STILL ARGUING ABOUT
IT.
>> Woodruff: AS WE WERE JUST
POINTING OUT IN ONE OF THESE
STATES WHERE IT'S ON THE CUSP,
THEY'RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT TO DO, VIRGINIA WITH A NEW
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNOR HAVING HAD A
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR THE STATE
LEGISLATURE, STATE SENATE NOW
HAS A VERY UNUSUAL SITUATION
THERE.
>> OF COURSE, THE NEW DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNOR RAN WITH HIS NUMBER ONE
PRIORITY TO EXPAND MEDICAID AND,
OF COURSE, IT'S A REPUBLICAN
HOUSE AND IT WAS A SPLIT, IT WAS
50/50 WITH THE LIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR BEING THE DECIDED VOTE.
SO THIS ONE DESIGNATED BY THIS
STATE SENATOR HAS SLIPPED THE
STATE SENATE TO THE REPUBLICANS
AND BASICALLY THERE'S THIS
BUDGET STANDOFF AND IT WAS
THINKING IT WAS GOING TO SHUT
DOWN THE STATE OVER THE BUDGET.
NOW, OF COURSE, IT LOOKS LIKE
THE BUDGET WILL NOT HAVE THE
MEDICAID EXPANSION IT IN MUCH TO
THE DISMAY OF THE DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNOR.
THERE IS STILL A POSSIBILITY
THAT THERE COULD BE A SPECIAL
SESSION, THAT MEDICAID COULD
COME BACK.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF MODERATE
REPUBLICANS IN THE SENATE WHO
SUPPORT THE MEDICAID EXPANSION
BUT CERTAINLY IT PUTS IT IN MUCH
MORE DOUBT JUST WITH THIS ONE
EXPECTED AND UNKNOWN WHY
RESIGNATION.
>> Woodruff: BUT THEN YOU
HAVE, JULIE, THESE OTHER STATES
THAT ARE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT,
REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS, UTAH,
PENNSYLVANIA, INDIANA, JUST TO
NAME A FEW, POLITICS PECULIAR TO
EACH STATE IN PLAY IN EVERY ONE.
>> YES, AND WE'RE STARTING TO
SEE KIND OF A THEME WITH THESE
REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS WHO WOULD
LIKE THE FEDERAL MONEY.
IT'S A LOT OF MONEY FOR A LARGE,
UNINSURED POPULATION IN MANY OF
THE STATES.
PENNSYLVANIA HAS PERHAPS 400,000
PEOPLE WHO COULD BE COVERED AND
WHAT MANY OF THE REPUBLICAN
GOVERNORS ARE DOING, WE'RE
SEEING THIS IN IOWA, IS WE WANT
TO EXPAND MEDICAID AND WANT TO
DO IT OUR WAY.
SO WE WANT THESE PEOPLE TO GO
INTO PRIVATE PLANS.
WE'VE ALREADY SEEN THAT IN
ARKANSAS.
WE WANT TO PERHAPS HAVE THE
PEOPLE PAY MORE IN COST SHARING.
SO HAVE THIS LOW-INCOME
POPULATION PAY SOMETHING FOR
THEIR COVERAGE, THAT'S NOT
TRADITIONALLY BEEN ALLOWED IN
MEDICAID, AND WE WANT PERHAPS
INCENTIVES FOR THEM TO DO
HEALTHY BEHAVIORS, MAYBE STOP
SMOKING OR LOSE WEIGHT.
SO THOSE TEND TO BE THE KINDS OF
THINGS THEY'RE ASKING FOR, AND
THEY HAVEN'T NECESSARILY GOTTEN
THAT YET FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT.
>> AND WHAT IS THE PUSHBACK THAT
YOU'RE HEARING FROM ADVOCATES
FOR THE POOR WHO SAY EVEN A
SMALL AMOUNT THAT SOME OF THESE
FOLKS ARE REQUIRED TO PAY CAN
PREVENT THEM FROM HAVING ACCESS?
>> THERE'S A LARGE BODY OF
RESEARCH THAT SUGGESTS COST
SHARING DETERS PEOPLE FROM
GETTING CARE AND PARTICULARLY
POOR PEOPLE FROM GETTING CARE
AND THERE'S A CONCERN THAT EVEN
IF YOU PUT SMALL AMOUNTS OF COST
SHARING ON THERE, PEOPLE WHO
NEED CARE, PARTICULARLY PEOPLE
WITH CHRONIC AILMENTS WON'T GET
THE CARE SO IT CAN BE
COUNTERPRODUCTIVE AND THEY'RE
VERY CONCERNED ABOUT THE IDEA OF
HAVING "SKIN IN THE GAME" FOR
THE MEDICAID POPULATION IN
PARTICULAR.
>> Woodruff: SO WHILE THE
DRAMAS PLAY OUT AND WITH REAL
CONSEQUENCES, THIS NOTION THAT
THERE ARE SEVERAL MILLION PEOPLE
WHO APPLIED FOR MEDICAID DON'T
HAVE THEIR APPLICATIONS
RESPONDED TO.
>> THAT'S RIGHT AND THAT'S
PARTLY BECAUSE PUTTING IN THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT EVERY STATE
HAD TO CHANGE THE WAY IT
CALCULATED ELIGIBILITY FOR THE
MEDICAID POPULATION TO BASICALLY
MAKE IT STANDARDIZED ACROSS ALL
OF THE STATES.
BASICALLY AS OF JANUARY 1, EVERY
STATE HAD TO CHANGE THE WAY IT
CALCULATED ELIGIBILITY.
ALSO S DIFFICULTY IN
healthcare.gov, the Web site
basically sending the
information to the states and
getting it back and forth.
SO THERE IS THIS BACKLOG, MOST
TURNS OUT TO BE IN CALIFORNIA
ILLINOIS, BUT ALSO BACKLOG
IN SOME STATES THAT DIDN'T
EXPAND MEDICAID, STATES LIKE
NORTH CAROLINA, GEORGIA,
HOPEFULLY JUST OVER THE NEXT FEW
WEEKS AS THESE STATES GET THEIR
I.T. PROBLEMS STRAIGHTENED OUT
THE BACKLOG WILL DISSIPATE IF
NOT GO AWAY.
>> Woodruff: JULIE ROVNER, ON
TOP OF IT, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: TEACHERS UNIONS LOST A
MAJOR COURT CASE IN CALIFORNIA
TODAY WHICH COULD MAKE IT EASIER
TO FIRE INEFFECTIVE TEACHERS.
A CALIFORNIA JUDGE RULED THAT
THE STATE'S TENURE PROTECTIONS
FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS ARE
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THE CASE WAS BROUGHT ON BEHALF
OF, BY, NINE STUDENTS WHO
SAID THOSE POLICIES EFFECTIVELY
DENIED THEIR RIGHT TO A QUALITY
EDUCATION.
WE BEGIN WITH SOME BACKGROUND.
>> Ifill: LOS ANGELES SUPERIOR
COURT JUDGE ROLF TREU STRUCK
DOWN THREE LAWS, SAYING THEY
OFFERED TEACHERS JOB SECURITY AT
THE EXPENSE OF MANY STUDENTS.
ELIZABETH VERGARA AND HER SISTER
BEATRIZ ARE TWO OF THE STUDENTS
WHO BROUGHT THE COMPLAINT.
A YEAR APART IN AGE, THEY ATTEND
THE SAME LOS ANGELES-AREA HIGH
SCHOOL.
THE SISTERS TOLD THE NEWSHOUR
THIS SPRING THAT WHEN THEY WERE
IN MIDDLE SCHOOL, THEY BOTH SAT
THROUGH A HISTORY CLASS TAUGHT
BY THE SAME INEFFECTIVE TEACHER:
>> HE WOULD JUST BE AT HIS DESK.
LIKE, JUST USING HIS COMPUTER OR
SLEEPING.
I DIDN'T EVEN LEARN ANYTHING,
LIKE I WAS GETTING BEHIND.
>> Ifill: IN 2012, THEY JOINED
WITH SEVEN OTHER CALIFORNIA
STUDENTS TO FILE SUIT AGAINST
THE STATE, SAYINGIR
EDUCATION SUFFERED BECAUSE
TEACHER AND TENURE LAWS
PREVENTED SCHOOLS FROM ACTING IN
THEIR BEST INTEREST.
TEACHERS ARE ELIGIBLE FOR TENURE
IN CALIFORNIA AFTER 18 MONTHS.
THE STUDENTS SOUGHT TO GET RID
OF THAT AND OTHER LAWS,
INCLUDING SENIORITY PROTECTIONS
AND DISMISSAL PROCEDURES THEY
SAY ALLOW POORLY-PERFORMING
TEACHERS TO STAY IN THE
CLASSROOM.
BUT ATTORNEYS FOR THE STATE AND
TEACHERS UNIONS TOLD THE JUDGE
THE LAWS ARE KEY TO RECRUITING
AND RETAINING A SKILLED TEACHING
FORCE, AND WERE MEANT TO ENSURE
EDUCATORS AREN'T DISMISSED
UNFAIRLY.
FOURTH GRADE TEACHER KELLY
IWAMOTO CONSIDERS THAT DUE
PROCESS PROTECTION CRUCIAL:
>> BECAUSE I SPEAK OUT VERY
FREQUENTLY ABOUT RESOURCES BEING
BROUGHT TO OUR DISTRICT FOR
LOWERING CLASS SIZES.
AND IF I'M VOCAL, AND SOMEONE
DOESN'T LIKE WHAT I'M SAYING,
THEN I CAN BE LET GO FOR THAT.
AND I DON'T THINK THAT'S FAIR.
>> Ifill: SEVERAL OTHER STATES
HAVE EITHER ELIMINATED OR
LIMITED TENURE PROTECTION
THROUGH LAW OR UNION CONTRACTS.
LAWYERS FOR THE STATE SAID THEY
PLAN TO APPEAL TODAY'S RULING.
>> Ifill: NOW, TO THE DECISION'S
POTENTIAL IMPACT.
RUSSLYNN ALI SERVES AS AN
ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER OF
"STUDENTS MATTER," WHICH
REPRESENTED THE PLAINTIFFS.
SHE IS A FORMER ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AT
THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.
AND JOSHUA PECHTAULT IS THE
PRESIDENT OF THE CALIFORNIA
FEDERATION OF TEACHERS, ONE OF
THE KEY PARTIES WHO LOST IN
TODAY'S RULING.
JOSHUA PECHTAULT, THERE ARE
6 MILLION STUDENTS IN
CALIFORNIA, 325,000 STUDENTS.
THIS IS THE BEGINNING OF THE END
OF TEACHER TENURE?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK SO.
WE'RE GOING TO APPEAL THIS AND I
THINK EVEN MORE IMPORTANTLY
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO WORK
WITH PARENTS AND COMMUNITY AND A
VISION FOR A QUALITY PUBLIC
EDUCATION THAT BOTH RAISES UP
KIDS AND ALSO VALUES THE MEN AND
WOMEN WHO WORK WITH THEM, WHICH
IS THE COMPLETE OPPOSITE OF WHAT
THIS RULING ATTEMPTS TO DO.
>> Ifill: RUSSLYNN ALI, HOW DO
WE KNOW IT'S THE TEACHERS WHO
ARE FAILING THE STUDENTS AND NOT
SOMETHING ELSE?
>> WELL, WHAT THE JUDGE DECIDED
TODAY MADE IT QUITE CLEAR THAT,
TAKEN TOGETHER, THE STATUTES
THAT GUARANTEE LIFETIME
EMPLOYMENT AFTER 18 MONTHS THAT
DON'T LOOK AT FACTORS LIKE
WHETHER TEACHERS ARE ACTUALLY
TEACHING KIDS AND WHETHER
THEY'RE LEARNING, STATUTES THAT
MAKE TERMINATION NEARLY
IMPOSSIBLE, COSTING HUNDREDS OF
HOUSE OF DOLLARS, AND STATUTES
THAT ENSURE THAT THOSE MOST NEW
TO THE PROFESSION ARE FIRST
FIRED, AND ANYTIME THERE NEEDS
TO BE A REDUCTION OF FORCE FOR
BUDGET REASONS, THEY'RE TAKING
TOGETHER THOSE UPSTATUTES
VIOLATE THE QUALITY RIGHT TO AN
EDUCATION GUARANTEED BY
CALIFORNIA'S CONSTITUTION.
>> Ifill: JOSHUA PECHTAULT,
THERE ARE THOSE WHO SAY THIS IS
ABOUT FUNDING.
IS THAT PART OF THE PROBLEM?
>> WELL, I THINK FUNDING IS --
YEAH, I THINK FUNDING IS A BIG
PART OF THIS.
IT'S FUNNY THAT WE'RE GOING TO
AT LEAST -- IF THE PLAINTIFFS
HAVE THEIR WAY, WE'LL SHAPE
EDUCATIOEDUCATIONAL POLICY BASEN
LAYOFFS.
THE CALIFORNIA TEACHERS
ASSOCIATION WORKS HARD TO PASS
PROGRESSIVE MORSERS TO STOP
BUDGET CUTS AND WE KNOW MORE HAS
TO BE DONE.
WE KNOW WHAT WORKS.
WE HAVE DISTRICTS THAT ARE
SUCCESSFUL.
WE HAVE SCHOOLS THAT ARE
SUCCESSFUL, AND IN THOSE
DISTRICTS AND IN THOSE SCHOOLS
IT'S WHERE THE COMMUNITY WORKS
COLLABORATIVELY.
EDUCATION IS A COLLABORATIVE
ENDEAVOR.
THE SLOGAN, IT TAKES A VILLAGE
TO EDUCATE A CHILD, THAT HAPPENS
IN A COOPERATIVE WAY, NOT BY
ATTACKING TEACHERS AND TEACHER
RIGHTS.
>> Ifill: SOMETHING FROM THE
JUDGE'S RULING TODAY IN WHICH HE
TALKED ABOUT THE FIRST FIRED
PART OF THE STATUTE AND HE SAID
IT WAS CLEAR TO HIM THAT KEEPING
A SENIOR AND INCOMPETENT TEACHER
WAS PREFERABLE TO LETTING GO A
JUNIOR EFFECTIVE TEACHER.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THAT
ARGUMENT?
>> WELL, SO, NUMBER ONE, WE
DON'T WANT TO SEE ANY TEACHERS
LET GO DURING LAYOFFS.
THAT'S THE MOST IMPORTANT POINT.
BUT THE REASON TO HAVE SENIORITY
IS BECAUSE SENIORITY CREATES AN
OBJECTIVE CRITERIA FOR
DETERMINING WHO'S IN THE
CLASSROOM.
IF IT'S ABOUT TEACHER
EFFECTIVENESS, THAT'S VERY
SUBJECTIVE AND, REALLY, WHAT
THESE FOLKS ULTIMATELY WANT TO
EVALUATING TEACHERS
BASED ON TEST SCORES.
THAT'S THE ONLY MEASURE THAT
THEY ARE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
COME UP WITH WHEN WE'RE
ASSESSING THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF TEACHERS IN A
PARTICULAR DISTRICT, AND WE'VE
SEEN YEARS, NOW, OF HAVING TEST
SCORES DRIVING EDUCATION AND
CURRICULUM.
IT DISTORTS WHAT HAPPENS IN THE
CLASSROOM, IT NARROWS THE
CURRICULUM AND IT'S NOT GOOD
EDUCATION POLICY, AND THESE
FOLKS ARE -- HAVE THE MONEY AND
RESOURCES TO FOLLOW THAT AGENDA.
>> Ifill: LET ME ALLOW --
PARDON ME -- LET ME ALLOW
RUSSLYNN ALI TO RESPOND TO THAT.
IS THERE ANOTHER AGENDA AT WORK
HERE IN.
>> THE ONLY AGENDA THAT THE
PLAINTIFFS IN THIS CASE THAT THE
LAWYERS, THAT ALL OF US, IT'S
ABOUT WHAT IS RIGHT FOR
STUDENTS.
THIS IS NOT ABOUT PITTING
STUDENTS AGAINST TEACHERS.
TO FRAME IT THAT WAY DOES A
DISSERVICE TO WHAT WE ALL NEED,
WHAT CALIFORNIA CITIZENS WANT TO
ACCOMPLISH AND THAT IS TO ENSURE
OUR STUDENTS HAVE ACCESS TO THE
BEST AND MOST MOTIVATED
TEACHERS, THAT THEY ARE INSPIRED
TO LEARN THAT WE TRANSFORM THE
WAY OUR SCHOOLS WORK SO EVERYONE
LEARNS BETTER.
>> Ifill: DO YOU JUDGE THAT
BY --
>> WE OUGHT NOT USE QUALITY
BLIND DECISIONS.
WE ARE NOT TALKING ABOUT
WIDGETS.
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT CHILDREN
AND THEIR LIVES.
WE NEED TO KNOW WHETHER THEY ARE
LEARNING.
THAT IS NOT TO SUGGEST THAT WE
OUGHT TO USE TEST SCORES ALONE,
BUT PART OF AN EVALUATION SYSTEM
THAT GAUGES TRUE LEARNING IN THE
CLASSROOM, WE OUGHT TO LOOK AT
THE ASSESSMENTS THAT WE GIVE
KIDS.
WE INTIMATED WE WERE DECIDING
POLICY BASED ON LAYOFFS.
THE TURN FACTOR, THAT IS THAT IN
SCHOOLS THAT SERVE MOSTLY
STUDENTS OF COLOR ARE SOME OF
OUR LOWEST PERFORMING STUDENTS
AND HIGHEST POVERTY SCHOOLS.
THEY SUFFER VACANCIES AT A RATE
THAT IS EXTRAORDINARY.
THOSE STUDENTS IN LOUISIANA, FOR
EXAMPLE, ARE AT 68% MORE LIKELY
TO HAVE A GROSSLY INEFFECTIVE
TEACHER IF THEY ARE ENGLISH
LANGUAGE LEARNERS.
THEY'RE ALMOST AS LIKELY TO HAVE
AN INEFFECTIVE TEACH
ARE AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDENTS.
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT EQUI.
THE AEQUI --EQUITY AND JUSTICE.
THOSE PRINCIPLES OUGHT NOT TO
FLY IN THE FACE OF WHAT IS IN
THE BEST INTEREST OF TEACHERS.
HAT'S IN THE BESTOF
INTEREST OF TEACHERS.
>> Ifill: JOSHUA PECHTAULT,
WHAT ARE THE PROSPECTS OF
APPEAL?
>> WE ARE HOPEFUL.
WE THINK THE EVIDENCE IS
COMPELLING THAT BLOWING UP THE
EDUCATION CODE IN CALIFORNIA
DOESN'T HELP WITH EQUITY.
IF DOING AWAY WITH SENIORITY AND
DUE PROCESS RIGHTS WAS SO
EFFECTIVE THEN WHY IS IT THAT IN
THE STATES WHERE THESE RIGHTS
DON'T EXIST FOR TEACHERS,
EDUCATION IS ALSO SUFFERING AND
IT'S SUFFERING FOR POOR AND
WORKING CLASS KIDS?
THERE ARE OBVIOUSLY OTHER MORE
COMPELLING REASONS THAT SHAPE
PUBLIC EDUCATION, NOT JUST THE
TEACHERS IN FRONT OF THE
CLASSROOM.
WE WANT THE BEST TEACHERS IN THE
CLASSROOM AND PUT THE RESOURCES
IN THAT ARE BEST, NOT MECHANISMS
FOR GETTING RID OF PEOPLE.
>> Ifill: JOSHUA PECHTAULT AND
RUSSLYNN ALI, THANK YOU BOTH
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
ACROSS THE COUNTRY THERE'S A NEW
EFFORT UNDERWAY TO PRESERVE
AMERICA'S HISTORICAL SITES,
WHILE AT THE SAME TIME TEACH A
NEW GENERATION THE ART, AND
IMPORTANCE, OF THAT WORK.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT STORY,
PART OF HIS ONGOING SERIES,
"CULTURE AT RISK."
>> Brown: HIGH ATOP CENTRAL
VIRGINIA'S SHENANDOAH MOUNTAINS,
THESE STUDENTS ARE CONTINUING
WORK BEGUN 75 YEARS AGO.
THEY'VE BEEN RENOVATING THE
SKYLAND STABLES, WHICH FOR
GENERATIONS HAVE PROVIDED PARK
VISITORS WITH HORSES TO RIDE
ALONG 200 MILES OF EQUESTRIAN
TRAILS.
THIS IS THE PILOT PROJECT OF THE
"HANDS ON PRESERVATION
EXPERIENCE," OR "HOPE" CREW, A
NEW NATION-WIDE INITIATIVE FROM
THE NATIONAL TRUST FOR HISTORIC
PRESERVATION.
MONICA RHODES IS ITS VOLUNTEER
COORDINATOR.
>> WHAT THE NATIONAL TRUST HOPES
TO BRING TO THIS, THROUGH THIS
NEW INITIATIVE, IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR A YOUNGER, MORE
DIVERSE AUDIENCE TO GET INVOLVED
W THESE BUILDINGS, TO REALLY
INTERACT WITH THEIR ENVIRONMENT
AND CONTRIBUTE TO THEIR COUNTRY.
>> Brown: THE TRUST IS
PARTNERING WITH THE NATIONAL
PARK SERVICE, THE CORPS NETWORK
AND OTHER GROUPS TO BRING A NEW
GENERA I
FOLD ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
IN THIS CASE, WATER DAMAGE AND
WEAR FROM THE HORSES HAD DAMAGED
SOME OF THE WOOD ON THIS RUSTIC
U-SHAPED STABLE.
IT ALSO NEEDED A NEW FENCE.
>> THERE ARE NUMBER OF HISTORIC
BUILDINGS IN THE NATION.
THE PARK SERVICE ALONE HAS ABOUT
A FOUR AND A HALF BILLION DOLLAR
BACKLOG OF DEFERRED MAINTENANCE,
SO THESE ARE HISTORIC BUILDINGS
THAT ARE IN NEED OF REPAIR AND
REHABILITATION RIGHT NOW.
>> Brown: WORKING WITH AN EXPERT
CRAFT, A TEAM OF STUDENTS
CARRIED OUT THE RESTORATION
WORK.
MANY ARE FROM CITIES FAR FROM
THE MOUNTAINS, NOW STUDYING AT
THE HARPERS FERRY JOB CORPS
CENTER IN WEST VIRGINIA.
>> I'M NOT USED TO BEING AROUND
HORSES.
SO YEAH, THEIR LOUD NOISES ARE
PRETTY STARTLING.
>> Brown: WHILE STAYING NEARBY,
STUDENTS LIKE JARMAINE BUDD EARN
$10 AN HOUR, FAR LESS THAN THE
$40 TO $60 AN HOUR A CONTRACTOR
MIGHT CHARGE.
IN EXCHANGE, THEY GET HANDS ON
EXPERIENCE IN A NEW KIND OF
WORK, WHICH BUDD SAYS REQUIRES
GREATER ATTENTION TO DETAIL.
>> THE CHALLENGING PART ABOUT IT
IS THE MATCHING OF THE WOOD. THE
ROUGHER.
AND SOME OF THE CUTS HAVE TO BE
A LITTLE MORE CLEANER AND MORE
PRECISE THAN INSIDE A HOUSE,
WHERE A LITTLE HALF INCH, YOU
WON'T REALLY TELL THAT
DIFFERENCE, BUT OUT HERE, IT'S A
BIG MARGIN.
>> Brown: ELIJAH SMITH IS FROM
WASHINGTON, DC.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
SAVE OLD BUILDINGS BECAUSE WHEN
YOU GO BACK YOU CAN SEE WHAT YOU
DID RIGHT, WHAT YOU DID WRONG,
AND THE OLDER SOMETHING IS THE
MORE VALUE THERE IS TO IT, IT
BRINGS MORE PEOPLE TO IT.
>> Brown: IN THE 1930'S IT WAS
THE CIVILIAN CONSERVATION CORPS,
UNDER PRESIDENT FRANKLIN DELANO
ROOSEVELT, THAT ORIGINALLY BUILT
THE NATIONAL PARK.
DURING THAT TIME THE STABLES,
AND THE NEARBY SKYLAND RESORT,
WERE ALSO PURCHASED BY THE
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE.
TO PRESERVE THEM FOR NEW
GENERATIONS TO COME, CRAFT
EXPERT DAVID LOGAN, WHO OWNS A
VINTAGE RESTORATION COMPANY IN
VIRGINIA, SAYS THE HOPE CREW HAS
DONE THE HEAVY LIFTING.
>> WHAT I HAVE DONE IS GUIDED
THE TEAM JUST ON SOME APPROACHES
FOR REPLACING SIDING, WAYS OF
CUTTING OUT THE OLD AND THEN HOW
TO HANDLE THE OAK TO LET IT
MOVE, JUST LITTLE TIPS AND
ADVICE.
>> Brown: BUT LOGAN SAYS HE SEES
A REAL DEARTH OF YOUNG PEOPLE
LEARNING HIS TRADE.
>> IN OUR AREA THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE REALLY SKILLED ARE 40 TO 65.
WE RARELY GET YOUNG PEOPLE
COMING INTO THIS FIELD AND I
THINK THAT'S VERY UNFORTUNATE.
>> Brown: FROM A CONSERVATION
STANDPOINT, LOGAN ARGUES THAT
OLDER STRUCTURES LIKE THESE
DESERVE TO BE SAVED.
AND STUDENT NICHOLAS EDWARDS
AGREES.
>> YOU'LL BE USING MORE LUMBER
TO MAKE A NEW BUILDING.
AND THEN YOU CAN USE,
SOMETHING'S BEEN STANDING UP
THERE FOR A WHILE, IT COULD BE
THERE FOR A LITTLE BIT LONGER
>> Brown: MONICA RHODES SAYS IN
ADDITION TO CONSERVATION, THIS
WORK IS ABOUT PRESERVING HISTORY
AND THE MEMORIES PEOPLE HAVE FOR
A PLACE.
>> IT'S CONTINUITY. YOU KNOW, IT
CONTINUES A HISTORICAL
CONVERSATION THAT STARTED IN THE
LATE 30'S INTO 2014.
SO LIKE I SAID, IT REALLY
CONTRIBUTES TO A SENSE OF PLACE
OF WHAT SHENANDOAH NATIONAL PARK
IS.
>> Brown: SHE HOPES  UPCOMING
PROJECTS LIKE THIS ONE, IN
MISSOURI, TEXAS, NEW MEXICO AND
MONTANA, WILL HELP INSTILL THOSE
VALUES AND INSPIRE MORE PEOPLE
TO GO INTO THIS FIELD.
FOR HIS PART, JARMAINE BUDD SAYS
HE WANTS TO DO MORE PRESERVATION
WORK.
AND AFTER THE WORK'S COMPLETE,
HE HOPES TO RETURN TO THE
STABLES, TO SEE HOW HIS OWN WORK
HAS HELD UP OVER TIME.
>> TO COME BACK TO A PLACE THAT
WE HELPED DO, THAT WE HELPED
BUILD.
TO SHOW EVERYBODY ELSE THIS IS
WHAT WE DID.
>> Brown: CREATING ANOTHER
CONNECTION TO THE PARK, AND TO
HISTORY.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
ISLAMIC MILITANTS IN IRAQ SEIZED
CONTROL OF MOSUL, THE COUNTRY'S
SECOND LARGEST CITY.
AND COALITION OFFICIALS IN
AFGHANISTAN BEGAN INVESTIGATING
THE DEATHS OF FIVE U.S.
SOLDIERS, APPARENTLY IN A
FRIENDLY FIRE INCIDENT.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR
FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT
DEFENSE SECRETARY HAGEL'S
CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY ABOUT
THE PRISONER SWAP THAT LED TO
ARMY SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL'S
RELEASE.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT